I plowed through sections 2.1-2.3 of SICP this past weekend, and my solutions
are on Github for the exercises. The coolest topic in these sections was
symbolic differentiation. In particular, exercise 2.58 covered a program that
could compute derivatives of an expression, symbolically. For example, if you
gave it an expression like:

```
3 * x * y + 4 + x + 9 * x * z
```

and asked it to differentiate with respect to x, it would return:

```
((3 * y) + (1 + (9 * z)))
```

Note that it can't "simplify" some terms further - i.e. in some cases it might
return `(3 * x) + (4 * x)` instead of `(7 * x)`, but that could possibly due to a
limitation of my solution.

Anyways, some of my notes on these sections:

* The choice of representation of data can greatly simplify the code for an
  algorithm. For example, it took me a while to figure out a suitable
representation for the n-queens problem in exercise 2.42, but once I thought of
a simple representation, I worked out the solution pretty quickly.

* Thinking abstractly and naming variables appropriately help to organize your
  thoughts in a problem. I initially started off directly using cars and cdrs,
but naming things using let greatly simplified the code. This sometimes leads to
solutions that somehow work out on the first try.

* SICP would be tough for someone trying to learn to program for the first time.
  I'm enjoying it now, but it helps to have had some programming experience and
mathematics knowledge.

Posted at 2018-05-22 03:54 PM
